# Mobile alternatives

Most people only know about Android and iOS.  See my guide on
[Android](https://github.com/TechnologyClassroom/SetupNotes/blob/master/os/mobile/android.md)
to see how I have used Android without Google Play or Google Services.

This guide is about alternatives to Android and iOS.

## Pine64

[Pine64](https://www.pine64.org/) is an interesting new company that rolls out
products that are geared towards tinkers and developers.  The hardware is as
open as possible within realistic constraints.  The end-result is usually cool
items that would normally be considered to be in the beta testing phase.  If
you are not interested in tinkering, do not look to Pine64 until their software
is more polished.

They have lots more interesting projects, but I am only highlighting their
mobile products here.

### PinePhone

[PinePhone](https://www.pine64.org/pinephone/)

[Wiki](https://wiki.pine64.org/index.php/PinePhone)

[Mobian](mobian-project.org/)

I tried Ubuntu Touch and Mobian with it.

### PineTab

[PineTab](https://www.pine64.org/pinetab/)

[Wiki](https://wiki.pine64.org/index.php/PineTab)

[Mobian](mobian-project.org/)

I tried Ubuntu Touch and Mobian with it.

### PineTime

[PineTime](https://www.pine64.org/pinetime/)

[Wiki](https://wiki.pine64.org/index.php/PineTime)

[Infinitime](https://infinitime.io/) is software that can run on the PineTime.  [Documentation](https://infinitime.io/documentation/) [GitHub](https://github.com/JF002/InfiniTime) [Releases](https://github.com/JF002/InfiniTime/releases)

## Purism

[Purism Librem 5](https://puri.sm/products/librem-5/)

[PureOS](https://pureos.net/)

I ordered my Librem 5 is 2018.  I am still waiting on it.  I have given them
lots of slack as they are developing hardware and software that will be a major
improvement forward in mobile computing.

## Ubuntu Touch

[Ubuntu Touch](https://ubuntu-touch.io/) maintained by UBports Foundation is an
alternative mobile operating system that runs on the most popular GNU/Linux
distribution Ubuntu.

[Devices](https://devices.ubuntu-touch.io/)

I used this OS as my daily driver for about 1 year using
the Bq Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition.  It was an interesting experience.  I would
not recommend it for everyday use.

The best part about it was the command line app was a real Ubuntu terminal in
your pocket.  Swiping directionally on the screen was arrow keys and tapping
was tab.  You had to remount the filesystem as read-write in order to do most
things which was officially not recommended.  If you upgraded packages through
apt, the system would not work so you had to limit yourself to only installing
packages.

Many of the available apps were "Web apps" and were essentially a web browser
that could only go to one page.  You could also replicate this functionality
most of the time by opening a browser and visiting the same address.  I wish
the app store would allow you to filter these web apps out as I never wanted
to use them.

There are some really cool native apps that have no equivalent elsewhere.

Overall, not enough app development happened in the ecosystem to meet most
people's workloads.  Using Ubuntu Touch is a compromise.
